README.md, before:

# Morello bootstrap scripts

## Pre-requisites
A **Debian 10 based aarch64** environment with **network access** and this repository available inside.  
Make sure you have around 4GB of available disk space for the whole process.

The scripts have not been tested in other environments, although any aarch64 based Linux should work.

## Setting up the build environment
`# apt install git build-essential python3`

## Building
### Quick build:
```
cd morello-aarch64/morello
source ./env/morello-aarch64
./scripts/build-all.sh
```

On success, your binary is `morello-aarch64/morello/bin/main`.

### Step by step build explanation
In `morello-aarch64/morello`:

1. `env/morello-aarch64`: set up $PATH for the Morello toolchain  
Sourcing this sets up $PATH such that the Morello supporting LLVM overshadows the system one (since not upstreamed yet).  
**Required for steps 4 to 6**  

1. `scripts/build-all.sh`: Runs all steps in sequence  
Download and compile everything. Requires step 1.  

1. `scripts/download-llvm-musl.sh`: Download required tools  
This clones a binary release of LLVM to `llvm`, its sources to `llvm-project` and the musl sources to `musl`.  
**NOTE**: this **downloads about 3GB** of stuff. This can be done on another machine and copied over for speed.  

1. `scripts/build-musl.sh`: Build Musl  
This builds llvm's compiler-rt into `llvm` and then runs `./configure && make` in musl's root directory **with libshim enabled**.  
Downloads a few MB of dependencies. Takes a while.  

1. `tools/Makefile`: Compile `morello_elf`  
This utility sets up the ELF headers of the Morello binary. Necessary since the ELF format is not finalized yet.  

1. `test-app/Makefile`: Compile a hello world program  
Compiles a simple hello world for the Morello architecture and passes it to morello\_elf.  
Output is in `bin`.  

A note on the long linker command: A good general purpose guide to replacing the libc is yet to be found. To help you understand what the command does you should:

* refer to `man gcc` and look up each argument  
* refer to the [gcc docs](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/) and read through the chapters on Standards and Standard Libraries  
* refer to [this gentoo doc](https://dev.gentoo.org/~vapier/crt.txt) for an explanation of what all the crt files do  
* refer to musl's source code for what the other `crt`s do  
(crt = C RunTime)  

### Note on samba
Building this on a samba share is possible, but wonky. The llvm builds use **symlinks** which need extra care.

Commit message:

morello: document the cross-compilation
Signed-off-by: Boyan Karatotev <boyan.karatotev@arm.com>

README.md, after:

# Morello bootstrap scripts

## Pre-requisites
A **Debian 10 based aarch64** environment with **network access** and this repository available inside.  
Make sure you have around 4GB of available disk space for the whole process.

The scripts have not been tested in other environments, although any aarch64 based Linux should work.

## Setting up the build environment
`# apt install git build-essential python3`

If cross compiling on x86 you also need:  
`# apt install libtinfo5 linux-libc-dev-arm64-cross`

## Building
### Quick build:
```
cd morello-aarch64/morello
./scripts/build-all.sh
```

On success, your binary is `morello-aarch64/morello/bin/main`.

### Step by step build explanation
In `morello-aarch64/morello`:

1. `env/morello-aarch64`: set up $PATH for the Morello toolchain  
Sourcing this sets up $PATH such that the Morello supporting LLVM overshadows the system one (since not upstreamed yet).  
**Required for steps 4 to 6**  

1. `scripts/build-all.sh`: Runs all steps in sequence  
Download and compile everything.
Accepts either --cross or --native. The --native switch downloads and builds everything from an aarch64 host. 
Passing --cross assumes an x86\_64 host

1. `scripts/download-llvm-musl.sh`: Download required tools  
This clones a binary release of LLVM to `llvm`, its sources to `llvm-project` and the musl sources to `musl`.  
Accepts a variable MODE={native, cross} and will checkout aarch64 or x86\_64 binaries respectively.  
**NOTE**: this **downloads about 3GB** of stuff. This can be done on another machine and copied over for speed.  

1. `scripts/build-musl.sh`: Build Musl  
This builds llvm's compiler-rt into `llvm` and then runs `./configure && make` in musl's root directory **with libshim enabled**.  
Downloads a few MB of dependencies. Takes a while.  

1. `tools/Makefile`: Compile `morello_elf`  
This utility sets up the ELF headers of the Morello binary. Necessary since the ELF format is not finalized yet.  

1. `test-app/Makefile`: Compile a hello world program  
Compiles a simple hello world for the Morello architecture and passes it to morello\_elf.  
Output is in `bin`.  

A note on the long linker command: A good general purpose guide to replacing the libc is yet to be found. To help you understand what the command does you should:

* refer to `man gcc` and look up each argument  
* refer to the [gcc docs](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/) and read through the chapters on Standards and Standard Libraries  
* refer to [this gentoo doc](https://dev.gentoo.org/~vapier/crt.txt) for an explanation of what all the crt files do  
* refer to musl's source code for what the other `crt`s do  
(crt = C RunTime)  

### Note on samba
Building this on a samba share is possible, but wonky. The llvm builds use **symlinks** which need extra care.
